[CCM] Custom allocation rules updates (#29444)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/cloud_cost_management/custom_allocation_rules.md

- Choose the allocation method: **Dynamic by metric**
- Choose the [destination tag](#define-the-destination) to split your costs by: **User** (`User A`, `User B`, `User C`).
- Refine the allocation by applying [filters](#filtering): **EC2** (`aws_product:ec2`).
- Define the metric query used to split the source costs: **Query execution time per user** (`sum:postgresql.queries.time{*}` by `{user}.as_count`).
- Create suballocations by [partitioning](#partitioning) the allocation rule: **environment** (`env`).

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-dynamic-by-metric.png" alt="The dynamic by metric split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

[1]: /metrics/#querying-metrics

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Define the destination

Select the destination tag(s) to split your costs by. The destination tag determines which entities (such as teams, projects, or environments) receive the allocated costs. For example:

You can select multiple values for your destination tag. For instance, if you select the `team` tag, you can choose specific teams like `teamA`, `teamB`, and `teamC` to receive the allocated costs.

> **Note**: The destination tag must exist in your cloud cost data. If you don't see the tag you want to use, ensure it's properly configured in your cloud provider and that Datadog is collecting it.

Reviewer: was this a new line? in Dynamic by Metric, the destination tag will be a tag that exists on the Metric data

imo, we can remove this line for now — should hopefully not need explaining

## Filtering

> A filter restricts which costs are included in an allocation rule, based on criteria you define. For example, you might only want to allocate costs where `aws_product` is `ec2` or where a specific tag is present. Filters help you target the allocation rule to the relevant subset of your cloud spend.

Reviewer: Filters help you target the allocation rule to the relevant subset of your cloud spend. For example, you might only want to allocate costs where `aws_product` is `ec2`. 

Proportional by spend: For example, you might want to allocate costs to the `team` tag, filtered to how much each team spends on `aws_product` is `ec2`. 

Dynamic b metric: For example, you might want to allocate costs to `teams` using PostgreSQL query execution time, filtered to queries where `env` is `production`.

   | Custom  | Split costs based on percentages you define to each destination. | Scenarios where business rules or agreements dictate how much each team should pay. | Untagged support costs are allocated 60% to `teamA`, 30% to `teamB`, and 10% to `teamC`. |
   | Proportional by spend | Split costs based on each destination's share of total spend. | Scenarios where teams should pay in proportion to their actual usage or spend. | Untagged support costs are allocated to teams `teamA`, `teamB`, and `teamC` based on their proportion of total spend on Amazon EC2.|
   | Dynamic by metric  | Split costs based on a performance or usage metric. | Scenarios where costs should be split in proportion to resource consumption metrics. | Shared PostgreSQL costs are allocated by total query execution time to users as defined by the Datadog metrics query `sum:postgresql.queries.time{*} by {user}.as_count()`. |

1. **[Select your destinations](#define-the-destination)**. Decide which tags, such as metric, cost, or environment, receive the allocated costs.
1. (Optional) **[Apply filters](#filtering)**. Refine the filters that should apply to the allocation rule.

>    _Example: Only apply cost allocation where `aws_product` is `ec2`._

Reviewer: _Example: Only apply cost allocation where `environment` is `production`._

^editing purely bc this makes more sense in my head in a general concept — im going to do some thinking on Filters though

> 1. (Optional) **[Use partitioning](#partitioning)**. Automatically create sub-allocations using your allocation logic.

Reviewer: [Apply a partition]

> 1. (Optional) **[Use partitioning](#partitioning)**. Automatically create sub-allocations using your allocation logic.

Reviewer: Automatically create multiple sub-allocations with the same allocation selections.

^does this make sense?

>    _Example: Split costs separately for each environment (`prod`, `staging`). Partitioning would create sub-allocations for each of these environments._

Reviewer: Partitioning effectively creates two allocations for each of these environments._

^we already use the term sub allocations above, let's take the opportunity to rephrase partitions one more time

> Custom cost allocation runs after [Tag Pipelines][1] have finished processing any updated tags, enabling allocations based on the latest user-defined tags. Costs are allocated on a daily basis, and can be applied to Cloud Cost metrics from AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure. 

Reviewer: Custom allocation rules runs after [Tag Pipelines][1], enabling cost allocations on the latest user-defined tags. 

^do we need an, "in addition to pre-existing tags"? I think it's not needed but slack me if you think it is?

> Custom cost allocation runs after [Tag Pipelines][1] have finished processing any updated tags, enabling allocations based on the latest user-defined tags. Costs are allocated on a daily basis, and can be applied to Cloud Cost metrics from AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure. 

Reviewer: Costs are allocated on a daily basis. Cost allocations can be applied to AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure costs.

## Accessing custom allocation rules

> Navigate to [**Cloud Cost > Custom Allocation Rules**][2], which is a section under Cloud Cost settings to establish rules and click **Add New Rule** to start.

Reviewer: Navigate to [**Cloud Cost > Settings > Custom Allocation Rules**][2] and click **Add New Rule** to start.

Reviewer: Can we merge this section with "Managing rules"? and we can keep it in the location that "Managing rules" is in.

> Navigate to [**Cloud Cost > Custom Allocation Rules**][2], which is a section under Cloud Cost settings to establish rules and click **Add New Rule** to start.

Author: ```suggestion
Navigate to [**Cloud Cost > Custom Allocation Rules**][2], which is a section under Cloud Cost Management settings to establish rules and click **Add New Rule** to start.
```

## Define the source

> Use the dropdown filters to specify the cloud provider, specific products or services, cost types, and any other attributes or tags that help you target the right costs.

Author: ```suggestion
From the dropdown, pick the shared cost you’d like to allocate.
```

- Refine the allocation by applying [filters](#filtering): **EC2** (`aws_product:ec2`).
- Define the metric query used to split the source costs: **Query execution time per user** (`sum:postgresql.queries.time{*}` by `{user}.as_count`).
- Create suballocations by [partitioning](#partitioning) the allocation rule: **environment** (`env`).

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-dynamic-by-metric.png" alt="The dynamic by metric split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

[1]: /metrics/#querying-metrics

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Define the destination

Select the destination tag(s) to split your costs by. The destination tag determines which entities (such as teams, projects, or environments) receive the allocated costs. For example:

You can select multiple values for your destination tag. For instance, if you select the `team` tag, you can choose specific teams like `teamA`, `teamB`, and `teamC` to receive the allocated costs.

## Filtering

Filters help you target the allocation rule to the relevant subset of your cloud spend. For example, you might only want to allocate costs where `aws_product` is `ec2`.

> - **Proportional by spend**: For example, you might want to allocate costs to the team tag, filtered to how much each team spends on `aws_product` is `ec2`.

Reviewer: Let's say you allocate shared costs to the team tag, proportional to how much each team spends. You can add a filter, creating a cost allocation that is proportional to how much team spends on `aws_product` is `ec2`.

> - **Dynamic b metric**: For example, you might want to allocate costs to teams using PostgreSQL query execution time, filtered to queries where `env` is `production`.

Reviewer: *by metric

Reviewer: Let's say you allocate shared PostgreSQL costs to the service tag, proportional to the query execution time of each service. You can add a filter, creating a cost allocation that only applies where `environment` is `production`.

^does this make sense?

## Partitioning

> Partitioning allows you to split a single allocation rule into multiple sub-allocations based on a tag value such as `env`. Instead of creating separate rules for each environment (like production and staging), you can create one rule that is automatically applied to each value of the tag. Each partitioned sub-allocation uses the same allocation structure, but applies only to costs matching that tag value.

Reviewer: Partitioning allows you to split a single allocation rule into multiple sub-allocations. For example, instead of creating separate rules for each environment (like production and staging), you can create one rule that is partitioned by `environment`. Each partitioned sub-allocation uses the same allocation structure, but applies only to costs matching that tag value.

> For example, if you partition by `env:prod` and `env:staging`, the rule creates separate allocations for each environment, but with the same structure.

Reviewer: I think we can delete this sentence

> **Note**: When using partitioning, the tag you select must exist in both your cloud cost and metrics data. For example, if you want to partition by `env`, this tag must be present in both your AWS cost data and your Datadog metrics.

Reviewer: **Note**: For Dynamic by Metric, the tag you select to partition by must exist in both your cloud cost and metric data. 

Does this make sense? And we can get remove of the "for example" sentence.

{{< tabs >}}

{{% tab "Even allocation" %}}

With this partition, the same even allocation rule is applied to each environment.

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/even_partition_diagram.png" alt="Diagram illustrating the even split strategy with partitioning" style="width:100%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Proportional allocation" %}}

> In this example, EC2 support fees are proportionally allocated to teams in two different environments - staging and prod - based on each team's share of EC2 spend.

Reviewer: With this partition, the same proportional allocation rule is applied to each environment.

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/proportional_partition_diagram.png" alt="Diagram illustrating the proportional split strategy with partitioning" style="width:100%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Dynamic by metric allocation" %}}

> In this example, PostgreSQL costs are allocated to users in staging and prod based on each user's share of total query execution time.

Reviewer: With this partition, the same dynamic by metric allocation rule is applied to each environment.

1. (Optional) **[Apply filters](#filtering)**. Refine the filters that should apply to the allocation rule.

   _Example: Only apply cost allocation where `aws_product` is `ec2`._
1. (Optional) **[Use partitioning](#partitioning)**. Automatically create sub-allocations using your allocation logic.

   _Example: Split costs separately for each environment (`prod`, `staging`). Partitioning would create sub-allocations for each of these environments._

Custom cost allocation runs after [Tag Pipelines][1] have finished processing any updated tags, enabling allocations based on the latest user-defined tags. Costs are allocated on a daily basis, and can be applied to Cloud Cost metrics from AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure. 

## Accessing custom allocation rules

Navigate to [**Cloud Cost > Custom Allocation Rules**][2], which is a section under Cloud Cost settings to establish rules and click **Add New Rule** to start.

## Define the source

Use the dropdown filters to specify the cloud provider, specific products or services, cost types, and any other attributes or tags that help you target the right costs.

## Choose an allocation method

> Choosing the right allocation method ensures that costs are attributed fairly and transparently, supporting accurate showback, chargeback, or internal reporting.

Author: ```suggestion
```

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-even.png" alt="The even split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom percentage" %}}

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/custom_percentage_diagram.png" alt="Diagram illustrating the even split strategy" style="width:70%;" >}}

With the custom percentage strategy, you can define static custom percentages for the destination tags you select. For example, if you have 3 destinations (`teamA`, `teamB`, `teamC`) you can allocate 60% to `teamA`, 30% to `teamB`, and 10% to `teamC`.

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-custom.png" alt="The even split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Proportional" %}}

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/proportional_diagram.png" alt="Diagram illustrating the proportional split strategy" style="width:70%;" >}}

Costs are allocated based on the proportional spend of destination values. Similarly to even allocation, you can further customize your allocation by setting filters and partitions.

> In the example above, EC2 support fees across teams are allocated based on their share of overall EC2 spend. Proportions are calculated based on how much each team spent.

Reviewer 2: Removing directional language

```suggestion
In the preceding diagram, EC2 support fees across teams are allocated based on their share of overall EC2 spend. Proportions are calculated based on how much each team spent.
```

> To create a rule for this allocation, you could:

Reviewer 2: Changing for parallel structure, but you can change both "can" to "could" if it works better.

```suggestion
To create a rule for this allocation, you can:
```

- Choose the allocation method: **Proportional by spend**.
- Define the allocation destination: **Team** (`teamA`, `teamB`, `teamC`).
- Define the proportions to split the source costs : **EC2** (`aws_product:ec2`).

You can also specify how cost proportions should be partitioned to ensure segment-specific allocations. For example, if you partition your costs by environment using tags like `staging` and `production`, the proportions are calculated separately for each environment. This ensures allocations are based on the specific proportions within each partition.

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-proportional-by-spend.png" alt="The proportional split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Dynamic by metric" %}}

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/dynamic_diagram.png" alt="Diagram illustrating the dynamic by metric strategy" style="width:70%;" >}}

Metrics-based allocation provides the ability to split up costs based on Datadog's [metrics queries][1]. By using performance metrics to allocate expenses, you can more accurately allocate costs based on application usage patterns.

> For example, this PostgreSQL metrics query `sum:postgresql.queries.time{*} by {user}.as_count()` tracks the total query execution time per user. The relative values are then used to determine what proportion of total PostgreSQL costs should be allocated to each user, as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, this PostgreSQL metrics query `sum:postgresql.queries.time{*} by {user}.as_count()` tracks the total query execution time per user. The relative values are then used to determine what proportion of total PostgreSQL costs should be allocated to each user.
```

> To create a rule for the above allocation, you could:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if you mean the diagram or the example in the paragraph directly before this sentence. If it's the former, I recommend stating the "preceding diagram" and if it's the latter, I recommend moving the sentence into that paragraph.

```suggestion
To create a rule for this allocation, you could:
```

- Define the costs to allocate (source): **PostGreSQL costs** (`azure_product_family:dbforpostgresql`).
- Choose the allocation method: **Dynamic by metric**
- Define the allocation destination: **User** (`User A`, `User B`, `User C`).
- Define the metric query to split the source costs: **Query execution time per user** (`sum:postgresql.queries.time{*}` by `{user}.as_count`).

{{< img src="cloud_cost/custom_allocation_rules/ui-dynamic-by-metric.png" alt="The dynamic by metric split strategy as seen in Datadog" style="width:90%;" >}}

[1]: /metrics/#querying-metrics

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Define the destination

Filter for and partition the groups, teams, projects, or business units that are to receive the allocated costs.

> The table below describes type of information that is required or optional when adding a destination.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table outlines the required and optional information for adding a destination.
```

| Partition costs by | Only applicable for Even, Proportional, and Dynamic by Metric strategies, optional | `environment` is all values |
| Name | Yes | allocate\_untagged\_support\_costs |

### Filtering

> A filter restricts which costs are included in an allocation rule, based on criteria you define. For example, you might only want to allocate costs where `aws_product` is `ec2` or where a specific tag is present. Filters help you target the allocation rule to just the relevant subset of your cloud spend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A filter restricts which costs are included in an allocation rule, based on criteria you define. For example, you might only want to allocate costs where `aws_product` is `ec2` or where a specific tag is present. Filters help you target the allocation rule to the relevant subset of your cloud spend.
```

## Managing rules
Rules can be modified and deleted in the [Custom Allocation Rules section][2] of the Cloud Cost settings page. All fields except for the rule name can be reconfigured.

When you delete a custom allocation rule, the associated allocation is automatically removed from the current month and prior month's data within 24 hours. To remove allocations from older data, contact [Datadog support][3] to request a backfill.

You can also disable a custom allocation rule without deleting it.

Rules are applied in the same order as shown in the list.

## Visualize your allocations

> Changes to custom allocation rules may take up to 24 hours to be applied. After being applied, the new allocations can be seen throughout Cloud Cost Management on all costs that have Container Allocation enabled. Custom allocated costs also include an `allocated_by_rule` tag, denoting the rule name that applied the allocation.

Reviewer: the new allocations can be seen throughout Cloud Cost Management on all costs where Container Allocation is set to `enabled`.
